Add visibility analysis tutorial (r.viewshed) (#135)
OSGeo/grass-tutorials: content/tutorials/viewshed/visibility_analysis.qmd

---
title: "Visibility Analysis with GRASS"
author: Rajveer Bishnoi
date: 2026-07-04
date-modified: today
lightbox: true
image: images/thumbnail.webp
categories: [raster, terrain, visualization, intermediate, Python]
description: >
  Learn how to compute what is visible from a location using r.viewshed:
  a single-point viewshed, the effect of observer height and distance,
  and cumulative visibility from multiple sites.
format:
  ipynb: default
  html:
    toc: true
    code-tools: true
    code-copy: true
    code-fold: false
engine: jupyter
execute:
  eval: false
jupyter: python3
---

# Introduction

A **viewshed** is the area of terrain that is visible from one or more observation
points. Answering "what can I see from here?" — or, equivalently, "from where can
this be seen?" — is a classic terrain analysis with many practical uses:

> - siting communication or observation towers so they cover the most ground,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- placing communication or observation towers so the visible area is maximized,
```

- planning fire lookouts and surveillance,
- assessing the visual impact of wind turbines, buildings, or quarries,
- modeling line-of-sight for radio links, and
- reconstructing what was visible from archaeological sites.

In this tutorial we use [r.viewshed](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.viewshed.html)
to compute visibility from a digital elevation model (DEM). We start with a single
observer, see how **observer height** and **maximum distance** change the result,
and finish by combining several viewsheds into a **cumulative visibility** map.

> ![Area visible from a 40 m tower (red) over shaded relief.](images/thumbnail.webp)

Reviewer: Remove this image and reduce the size of all of them, same as for #136

::: {.callout-note title="Demo dataset"}
This tutorial uses the standard GRASS
[North Carolina sample dataset](https://grass.osgeo.org/sampledata/north_carolina/nc_spm_08_grass7.zip)
(`nc_spm_08_grass7`) and its 10 m `elevation` DEM. You can follow along with any
DEM by substituting your own raster.
:::

::: {.callout-note title="How to run this tutorial"}
The code below uses the GRASS Python API in a Jupyter notebook. If you are new to
running GRASS from Python, see the
[Get started](https://grass-tutorials.osgeo.org/content/tutorials/get_started/fast_track.html)
tutorials to set up an environment. Every step also works from the GRASS GUI or
command line — just use the tool name (for example `r.viewshed`) with the same
parameters.
:::

::: {.callout-note title="GRASS version"}
The examples use the [grass.tools API](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/python_intro.html)
(the `Tools` class), introduced in GRASS 8.5. On earlier versions you can run the
same tools with `gs.run_command("r.viewshed", ...)`.

> :::

Reviewer: Same comments as in the vector analysis PR. See there: https://github.com/OSGeo/grass-tutorials/pull/136#discussion_r3566137042 and https://github.com/OSGeo/grass-tutorials/pull/136#discussion_r3566140787.

follows the terrain: ridge crests that share a line of sight light up, while the
valleys between them are blocked. You can quantify the visible area with
[r.stats](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.stats.html):

```{python}
# Cell counts for each value (each cell is 10 x 10 m = 100 m²)
print(tools.r_stats(input="viewshed", flags="c").stdout)
```

# The effect of observer height

Raising the observer dramatically increases what can be seen — this is exactly why
lookout towers exist. Let's put the observer on a 40 m tower by changing
`observer_elevation`.

```{python}
tools.r_viewshed(
    input="elevation",
    output="viewshed_tower",
    coordinates=(637500, 221500),
    observer_elevation=40,
    flags="b",
)
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="visible_tower = if(viewshed_tower == 1, 1, null())")
gs.write_command("r.colors", map="visible_tower", rules="-", stdin="1 red")

tower_map = gj.Map(width=800)
tower_map.d_rast(map="relief")
tower_map.d_rast(map="visible_tower")
tower_map.d_vect(map="observer", icon="basic/marker", size=26,
                 fill_color="blue", color="white")
tower_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(4, 6))
tower_map.show()
```

> ![Viewshed from a 40 m tower at the same location. The visible area jumps to about 46.6 km² — roughly seven times the ground-level view.](images/viewshed_tower.webp)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Viewshed from a 40 m tower at the same location. The visible area increases to about 46.6 km² — roughly seven times the ground-level view.](images/viewshed_tower.webp)
```

you are modeling visibility *of* a target of known height (say, whether a 30 m
turbine is visible), use the `target_elevation` parameter instead of, or in addition
to, `observer_elevation`.

# Limiting the search distance

By default `r.viewshed` searches the entire region. Real observers, however, have a
practical range — the reach of a radio, the resolution of the eye, or a study area
boundary. The `max_distance` parameter (in map units, here meters) restricts the
analysis to a radius around the observer, which also speeds up the computation.

```{python}
tools.r_viewshed(
    input="elevation",
    output="viewshed_3km",
    coordinates=(637500, 221500),
    observer_elevation=40,
    max_distance=3000,
    flags="b",
)
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="visible_3km = if(viewshed_3km == 1, 1, null())")
gs.write_command("r.colors", map="visible_3km", rules="-", stdin="1 red")

dist_map = gj.Map(width=800)
dist_map.d_rast(map="relief")
dist_map.d_rast(map="visible_3km")
dist_map.d_vect(map="observer", icon="basic/marker", size=26,
                fill_color="blue", color="white")
dist_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(4, 6))
dist_map.show()
```

> ![The same tower viewshed clipped to a 3 km radius (about 11.4 km² visible). The circular boundary marks the `max_distance` limit.](images/viewshed_maxdist.webp)

Reviewer: You don't need all the grey area around, zoom in to make such figures

Reviewer: Show also the command used to estimate area

curvature of the Earth (and atmospheric `refraction_coeff` for the bending of
light). Ignoring curvature overestimates what is visible at long range.
:::

# Cumulative visibility from several sites

A common planning question is not "what can one site see?" but "how well does a
*network* of sites cover the landscape?" We can answer this by computing a viewshed
for each candidate site and adding them together. The result — a **cumulative
viewshed** — counts how many sites can see each cell.

Here we place five towers across the area and loop over them.

```{python}
towers = [
    (633000, 224000),
    (641000, 224500),
    (634500, 217500),
    (642000, 218500),
    (637500, 221500),
]

viewshed_maps = []
for i, (x, y) in enumerate(towers, start=1):
    name = f"tower_{i}"
    tools.r_viewshed(
        input="elevation",
        output=name,
        coordinates=(x, y),
        observer_elevation=40,
        flags="b",
    )
    viewshed_maps.append(name)
```

Each boolean viewshed contributes a `1` where it is visible, so summing them with
[r.series](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.series.html) gives the

> number of towers that see each cell. We drop cells seen by no tower.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number of towers that see each cell. We drop cells that are not seen by any tower.
```

Reviewer: There could be a table with area seen by 1, 2, 3, etc towers. See r.report, for example, that has a JSON output to easily parse it and create a nice table, i.e., work the examples a bit more, aim for a more interesting story.

tools.r_colors(map="cumulative", color="plasma")
```

To show the towers on the map, load them as a single vector layer.

```{python}
towers_csv = "\n".join(f"{x},{y}" for x, y in towers)
gs.write_command("v.in.ascii", input="-", output="towers",
                 separator="comma", stdin=towers_csv)

cumulative_map = gj.Map(width=800)
cumulative_map.d_rast(map="relief")
cumulative_map.d_rast(map="cumulative")
cumulative_map.d_vect(map="towers", icon="basic/marker", size=22,
                      fill_color="cyan", color="black")
cumulative_map.d_legend(raster="cumulative", at=(5, 45, 2, 5), flags="b",
                        title="towers")
cumulative_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(4, 6))
cumulative_map.show()
```

![Cumulative visibility from five 40 m towers (cyan markers). Brighter colors mark cells seen by more towers; dark purple cells are seen by only one.](images/cumulative.webp)

Cells range from being seen by a single tower (dark purple) up to all five (bright
yellow). This kind of map is the starting point for **site optimization**: you can
compare tower layouts, spot redundant coverage, and find the gaps that no site can

> see.

Reviewer: Perhaps it would be interesting to see one of these ideas actually developed here...

# Summary

You have used [r.viewshed](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.viewshed.html) to:

- compute a single-observer viewshed and measure the visible area,
- see how **observer height** and **maximum distance** reshape visibility,
- combine several viewsheds into a **cumulative visibility** map.

From here you might explore the exact-angle output of `r.viewshed` (omit the `-b`
flag to get the vertical angle to each visible cell), correct for Earth curvature on
larger DEMs, or combine visibility with the
[Modeling Movement in GRASS](../modeling_movement/GRASS_movement.qmd) tutorial to
weight routes by how exposed they are. To learn more about working with terrain, see

> [Visualizing and Modeling Terrain from DEMs in GRASS](../terrain_and_DEMs/GRASS_terrain.qmd).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
weight routes by how exposed they are. 
```

[Get started with GRASS & Python](https://grass-tutorials.osgeo.org/content/tutorials/get_started/fast_track_grass_and_python.html)
tutorial. Every step also works from the GRASS GUI or command line; use the tool name
(for example `r.viewshed`) with the same parameters.
:::

# Getting the elevation data

The towers are real places, so rather than use a prepackaged sample dataset we
download the terrain around them from the USGS. We create a new GRASS project in UTM
zone 17N (EPSG:32617) with
[create_project](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/libpython/script.html#script.core.create_project),
then fetch 1 arc-second (about 30 m) elevation from the USGS National Map with
[r.in.usgs](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/addons/r.in.usgs.html), an
add-on installed with
[g.extension](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/g.extension.html).

```{python}
import sys
import subprocess
from pathlib import Path

sys.path.append(
    subprocess.check_output(["grass", "--config", "python_path"], text=True).strip()
)

import grass.script as gs
import grass.jupyter as gj
from grass.tools import Tools

# Create the project once, then start a session in it

> project = Path.home() / "grassdata" / "nantahala"

Reviewer 2: No need for additional directory
```suggestion
project = Path.home() / "nantahala"
```

This downloads the current 1 arc-second NED tile for the area (about 58 MB) and takes
a couple of minutes, so the cell is not instant. Add `flags="i"` first to preview the
tiles and total size without downloading. USGS occasionally republishes its elevation
data, so the exact areas reported below may shift a little over time.
:::

::: {.callout-note title="GRASS version"}
The examples use the [grass.tools API](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/python_intro.html)
(the `Tools` class), introduced in GRASS 8.5. On earlier versions you can run the same
tools with `gs.run_command("r.viewshed", ...)`.
:::

# The study area

Let's place the three towers and look at the terrain they watch over. We enter their
coordinates (converted from the published latitude and longitude to UTM 17N) with
[v.in.ascii](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.in.ascii.html), reading
them straight from a text buffer with `StringIO`. We also record the height of each
tower's cab above the ground, then read the summit elevation from the DEM with
[v.what.rast](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.what.rast.html).

```{python}
import io

towers_csv = """266819|3896041|Wayah Bald|16

> 265577|3906808|Wesser Bald|9

Reviewer 2: Use commas

274053|3881661|Albert Mountain|12"""

tools.v_in_ascii(
    input=io.StringIO(towers_csv), output="towers", separator="pipe",
    columns="x double precision, y double precision, name varchar(20), tower_m integer",
    x=1, y=2,
)
tools.v_what_rast(map="towers", raster="elevation", column="base_elev")

> print(tools.v_db_select(map="towers").stdout)

Reviewer 2: stdout -> text

```

The summits stand well above the surrounding valleys, from about 1400 m at Wesser Bald
to 1630 m at Wayah Bald. We render a shaded-relief base with
[r.relief](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.relief.html), drape the
elevation colors over it with
[r.shade](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.shade.html), and add the
towers. A small helper labels each tower with
[d.text](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/d.text.html) just to the right of
its position in the current region.

```{python}
import json

tools.r_relief(input="elevation", output="relief", zscale=1.5)
tools.r_colors(map="elevation", color="elevation")
tools.r_shade(shade="relief", color="elevation", output="shaded_elev", brighten=30)

def label_towers(m, only=None):
    """Write each tower's name on map m, offset to the right of its marker."""

>     r = gs.parse_command("g.region", flags="g")

Reviewer 2: use tools with json

tools.r_viewshed(input="elevation", output="wayah_ground", coordinates=WAYAH,
                 observer_elevation=1.75, max_distance=32000, flags="cb", memory=2000)

# The same lookout in the 16 m tower cab
tools.r_viewshed(input="elevation", output="wayah_tower", coordinates=WAYAH,
                 observer_elevation=16, max_distance=32000, flags="cb", memory=2000)
```

[r.report](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.report.html) gives the area
of each class in a viewshed. Category 1 is the visible area; here it grows from about
165 km² at ground level to 277 km² from the tower.

```{python}
print(tools.r_report(map="wayah_ground", units="k", flags="n").stdout)
print(tools.r_report(map="wayah_tower", units="k", flags="n").stdout)
```

That is nearly 70% more visible area for 16 m of extra height, which is what made the
towers worth building. We draw the ground-level viewshed in dark red and the extra
area the tower adds in orange, zooming in around Wayah Bald.

```{python}
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="ground_vis = if(wayah_ground == 1, 1, null())")
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="tower_gain = if(wayah_tower == 1 && wayah_ground == 0, 1, null())")

> gs.write_command("r.colors", map="ground_vis", rules="-", stdin="1 178:24:43")

Reviewer 2: Please use tools with StringIO

`refraction_coeff`; we leave it off.
:::

# Seeing smoke, not ground

A lookout watches for smoke rising above the canopy, not for the forest floor. A
column of smoke a few meters tall can clear a ridge that hides the ground behind it.
`r.viewshed` models this with `target_elevation`, the height of the target above the
ground. We set it to 15 m, a modest smoke column.

```{python}
tools.r_viewshed(input="elevation", output="wayah_smoke", coordinates=WAYAH,
                 observer_elevation=16, target_elevation=15, max_distance=32000,
                 flags="cb", memory=2000)

print(tools.r_report(map="wayah_smoke", units="k", flags="n").stdout)
```

Allowing for a 15 m smoke column raises the detectable area from 277 km² to about
412 km², nearly 50% more. In the map below the dark red is the tower's full terrain
view (the 277 km² baseline) and orange is the extra area where the ground is hidden
but a 15 m smoke column would still be visible.

```{python}
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="terrain_vis = if(wayah_tower == 1, 1, null())")
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="smoke_gain = if(wayah_smoke == 1 && wayah_tower == 0, 1, null())")

> gs.write_command("r.colors", map="terrain_vis", rules="-", stdin="1 178:24:43")

Reviewer 2: Please fix here as well

us how many towers can detect a fire at each cell.

```{python}
towers = json.loads(tools.v_db_select(map="towers", format="json").stdout)["records"]

detection_maps = []
for t in towers:
    name = t["name"].split()[0].lower()   # wayah, wesser, albert
    out = f"detect_{name}"
    tools.r_viewshed(input="elevation", output=out, coordinates=(t["x"], t["y"]),
                     observer_elevation=t["tower_m"], target_elevation=15,
                     max_distance=32000, flags="cb", memory=2000)
    detection_maps.append(out)

# r.series sums to a floating-point map; make it integer so the classes are 1, 2, 3
tools.r_series(input=detection_maps, output="coverage_sum", method="sum")
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="coverage = int(coverage_sum)")
tools.r_null(map="coverage", setnull=0)   # drop cells that are not seen by any tower
```

How much of the forest does the network cover?
[r.report](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.report.html) returns
per-class areas, and its JSON output turns into a tidy table with pandas.

```{python}
import pandas as pd

report = json.loads(
    tools.r_report(map="coverage", units=["k", "p"], format="json").stdout

> )

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
report = tools.r_report(map="coverage", units=["k", "p"], format="json")
```

rows = []
for cat in report["categories"]:
    if cat["category"] not in (1, 2, 3):   # skip any no-data class
        continue
    area = next(u["value"] for u in cat["units"] if "kilo" in u["unit"])
    pct = next(u["value"] for u in cat["units"] if u["unit"] == "percent")
    rows.append({"seen by (towers)": cat["category"],
                 "area (km²)": round(area, 1), "share of region": f"{pct:.1f}%"})
pd.DataFrame(rows)
```

| seen by (towers) | area (km²) | share of region |
|---|---|---|
| 1 | 416.4 | 26.7% |
| 2 | 214.8 | 13.7% |
| 3 | 61.1 | 3.9% |

The three towers together watch about 692 km², or 44% of this 1,562 km² region. Only
4% is covered by all three at once, along the central ridges where their circles
overlap. We map the coverage with one color per level.

```{python}

> gs.write_command("r.colors", map="coverage", rules="-",

Reviewer 2: please use tools everywhere

coverage_map.d_rast(map="coverage")
coverage_map.d_vect(map="towers", icon="basic/triangle", size=12,
                    fill_color="white", color="black", width=2)
label_towers(coverage_map)
coverage_map.d_legend(raster="coverage", at=(5, 20, 90, 93), flags="b",
                      use=[1, 2, 3], fontsize=14, title="towers")
coverage_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(2, 6), bgcolor="white", fontsize=13)
coverage_map.show()
```

![Network detection coverage: terrain seen by one tower (yellow), two (orange), or all three (red).](images/coverage.webp)

# Where should a fourth tower go?

The gap map turns "where should a new tower go?" into a computation. A natural
candidate is the highest summit that no current tower can see, since high ground has
the best chance of a long view. We isolate the blind area, find its highest cell with
[r.stats](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.stats.html), and test a tower
there.

```{python}
# cells no tower currently see, and their elevation
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="blind = if(isnull(coverage), 1, null())")
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="blind_elev = if(isnull(coverage), elevation, null())")

# coordinates of the highest blind cell

> stats = tools.r_stats(input="blind_elev", flags="gn").stdout.strip().splitlines()

Reviewer 2: use json

---
title: "Visibility Analysis with GRASS: Fire Lookout Towers"
author: "Rajveer Bishnoi"
date: 2026-07-05
date-modified: today
lightbox: true
image: images/thumbnail.webp
categories: [raster, terrain, visualization, intermediate, Python]
description: >
  Use r.viewshed and real USGS terrain to explore why fire lookout towers stand

>   where they do, how far they could see, and how well a network of them covered

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Use r.viewshed and USGS terrain data to explore why fire lookout towers stand
  where they do, how far they can see, and how well a network of them cover 
```

::: {.callout-note title="How to run this tutorial"}
The code uses the GRASS Python API in a Jupyter notebook. If you are new to running
GRASS from Python, see the
[Get started with GRASS & Python](https://grass-tutorials.osgeo.org/content/tutorials/get_started/fast_track_grass_and_python.html)
tutorial. Every step also works from the GRASS GUI or command line; use the tool name
(for example `r.viewshed`) with the same parameters.
:::

# Getting the elevation data

The towers are real places, so rather than use a prepackaged sample dataset we
download the terrain around them from the USGS. We work in a new GRASS project in UTM zone 17N (EPSG:32617)
and fetch 1 arc-second (about 30 m) elevation from the USGS National Map with
[r.in.usgs](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/addons/r.in.usgs.html), an
add-on installed with
[g.extension](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/g.extension.html).

```bash
# One-time: create the project and install the add-on
grass -c EPSG:32617 ~/grassdata/nantahala -e
grass ~/grassdata/nantahala/PERMANENT --exec g.extension extension=r.in.usgs

> ```

Reviewer: You can use python for this too; see the `create_project()` function and how it is used in other tutorials

```{python}
import sys
import subprocess

sys.path.append(
    subprocess.check_output(["grass", "--config", "python_path"], text=True).strip()
)

import grass.script as gs
import grass.jupyter as gj
from grass.tools import Tools

session = gj.init("~/grassdata", "nantahala", "PERMANENT")
tools = Tools()

# A ~40 x 39 km window over the Nantahala Mountains, at 30 m resolution
tools.g_region(n=3916000, s=3877000, w=252000, e=292000, res=30)

# Download and import the National Elevation Dataset for this region
tools.r_in_usgs(product="ned", ned_dataset="ned1sec", ned_release="all",

>                 title_filter="20220725", output_name="elevation",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
               output_name="elevation",
```

Reviewer: Better remove this so the default dataset is downloaded, even if in the future the data itself is different, it will always download something.

  for this footprint.
- `title_filter="20220725"` pins one published vintage, which keeps the download and
  the areas reported below reproducible. Drop it to fetch whatever is current.
:::

::: {.callout-note title="GRASS version"}
The examples use the [grass.tools API](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/python_intro.html)
(the `Tools` class), introduced in GRASS 8.5. On earlier versions you can run the same
tools with `gs.run_command("r.viewshed", ...)`.
:::

# The study area

Let's place the three towers and look at the terrain they watch over. We enter their
coordinates (converted from the published latitude and longitude to UTM 17N), record
the height of each tower's cab above the ground, and read the summit elevation from
the DEM with
[v.what.rast](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/v.what.rast.html).

```{python}
towers_csv = """266819|3896041|Wayah Bald|16
265577|3906808|Wesser Bald|9
274053|3881661|Albert Mountain|12"""

gs.write_command(
    "v.in.ascii", input="-", output="towers", separator="pipe",
    columns="x double precision, y double precision, name varchar(20), tower_m integer",
    x=1, y=2, stdin=towers_csv,

> )

Reviewer: use StringIO for this part, so you can also use the Tools API

tools.v_what_rast(map="towers", raster="elevation", column="base_elev")
print(tools.v_db_select(map="towers").stdout)
```

The summits stand well above the surrounding valleys, from about 1400 m at Wesser Bald
to 1630 m at Wayah Bald. We render a shaded-relief base with
[r.relief](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.relief.html), drape the
elevation colors over it with
[r.shade](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.shade.html), and add the
towers. A small helper labels each tower with

> [d.text](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/d.text.html) at its position in

Reviewer: See my comment about labels, they partially overlap the symbols, please shift them a little bit to the right

roughly 20 miles, so we cap the search at `max_distance=32000` (32 km) and, at that
range, apply Earth-curvature correction with `-c` (see the callout below).

```{python}
WAYAH = (266819, 3896041)

# A person standing on the summit (eye height 1.75 m)
tools.r_viewshed(input="elevation", output="wayah_ground", coordinates=WAYAH,
                 observer_elevation=1.75, max_distance=32000, flags="cb", memory=2000)

# The same lookout in the 16 m tower cab
tools.r_viewshed(input="elevation", output="wayah_tower", coordinates=WAYAH,
                 observer_elevation=16, max_distance=32000, flags="cb", memory=2000)
```

A small helper turns a boolean viewshed into a visible area in km², reading the cell
size from the current region so it matches the imported grid:

```{python}
def visible_km2(viewshed):
    res = gs.region()["nsres"]
    stats = tools.r_stats(input=viewshed, flags="cn").stdout
    cells = sum(int(line.split()[1]) for line in stats.splitlines()
                if line.split()[0] == "1")
    return cells * res * res / 1e6

print(f"standing on the summit: {visible_km2('wayah_ground'):.0f} km2")
print(f"from the 16 m tower:    {visible_km2('wayah_tower'):.0f} km2")

> ```

Reviewer: Use r.report here, no need to define this functon

about 277 km², nearly 70% more for 16 m of extra height. That gain is what made the
towers worth building. We draw the ground-level viewshed in dark red and the extra area the tower
adds in orange, zooming in around Wayah Bald.

```{python}
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="ground_vis = if(wayah_ground == 1, 1, null())")
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="tower_gain = if(wayah_tower == 1 && wayah_ground == 0, 1, null())")
gs.write_command("r.colors", map="ground_vis", rules="-", stdin="1 178:24:43")
gs.write_command("r.colors", map="tower_gain", rules="-", stdin="1 239:138:98")

tools.g_region(n=3908000, s=3884000, w=252000, e=284000, res=30)   # zoom to Wayah Bald

height_map = gj.Map(width=600)
height_map.d_rast(map="relief")
height_map.d_rast(map="tower_gain")
height_map.d_rast(map="ground_vis")
height_map.d_vect(map="towers", where="name='Wayah Bald'", icon="basic/triangle",
                  size=13, fill_color="white", color="black", width=2)
label_towers(height_map, only=["Wayah Bald"])
height_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(2, 5), bgcolor="white")
height_map.show()

tools.g_region(raster="elevation")   # restore the full region for analysis
```

> ![From Wayah Bald: visible standing on the summit (dark red) and the extra area gained from the 16 m tower (orange).](images/observer_height.webp)

Reviewer: The label seems way off in this map

of sight. `r.viewshed` corrects for this with the `-c` flag. Rerunning the tower
viewshed without `-c` reports about 282 km² instead of 277 km², an overestimate of
roughly 2%. The effect is small here because visibility in these steep mountains is
limited by intervening ridges rather than by the horizon; over flat land or water at
the same range the correction matters much more. Atmospheric refraction, which bends
light back down slightly, is a separate effect enabled by the `-r` flag with
`refraction_coeff`; we leave it off.
:::

# Seeing smoke, not ground

A lookout scans for smoke rising above the canopy rather than for the ground itself.
A column of smoke a few meters tall can clear a ridge that hides the ground behind
it. `r.viewshed` models this with `target_elevation`, the height of the target above
the ground. We set it to 15 m, a modest smoke column.

```{python}
tools.r_viewshed(input="elevation", output="wayah_smoke", coordinates=WAYAH,
                 observer_elevation=16, target_elevation=15, max_distance=32000,
                 flags="cb", memory=2000)

print(f"ground visible:   {visible_km2('wayah_tower'):.0f} km2")

> print(f"smoke detectable: {visible_km2('wayah_smoke'):.0f} km2")

Reviewer: use r.report here too and parse the output you want

```

Allowing for a 15 m smoke column raises the detectable area from 277 km² to about
412 km², nearly 50% more. In the map below the dark red is now the tower's full
terrain view (the 277 km² baseline) and orange is the extra area where the ground is
hidden but a 15 m smoke column would still be visible.

```{python}
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="terrain_vis = if(wayah_tower == 1, 1, null())")
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="smoke_gain = if(wayah_smoke == 1 && wayah_tower == 0, 1, null())")
gs.write_command("r.colors", map="terrain_vis", rules="-", stdin="1 178:24:43")
gs.write_command("r.colors", map="smoke_gain", rules="-", stdin="1 253:184:99")

tools.g_region(n=3908000, s=3884000, w=252000, e=284000, res=30)   # zoom to Wayah Bald

smoke_map = gj.Map(width=600)
smoke_map.d_rast(map="relief")
smoke_map.d_rast(map="smoke_gain")
smoke_map.d_rast(map="terrain_vis")
smoke_map.d_vect(map="towers", where="name='Wayah Bald'", icon="basic/triangle",
                 size=13, fill_color="white", color="black", width=2)
label_towers(smoke_map, only=["Wayah Bald"])
smoke_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(2, 5), bgcolor="white")
smoke_map.show()

tools.g_region(raster="elevation")
```

> ![Wayah Bald tower: terrain visible (dark red) and the extra area where a 15 m smoke column is detectable (orange).](images/smoke_detection.webp)

Reviewer: The label seems way off in this map

# The tower network

One tower leaves gaps. Towers with overlapping views fill in each other's blind
spots. We loop over the three towers, compute a smoke-detection viewshed for each using its own cab height, and add
the boolean maps with
[r.series](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.series.html). The sum tells
us how many towers can detect a fire at each cell.

```{python}
towers = json.loads(tools.v_db_select(map="towers", format="json").stdout)["records"]

detection_maps = []
for t in towers:
    name = t["name"].split()[0].lower()   # wayah, wesser, albert
    out = f"detect_{name}"
    tools.r_viewshed(input="elevation", output=out, coordinates=(t["x"], t["y"]),
                     observer_elevation=t["tower_m"], target_elevation=15,
                     max_distance=32000, flags="cb", memory=2000)
    detection_maps.append(out)

tools.r_series(input=detection_maps, output="coverage_sum", method="sum")

> tools.r_mapcalc(expression="coverage = int(coverage_sum)")

Reviewer: why do you need this?

tools.r_null(map="coverage", setnull=0)   # drop cells that are not seen by any tower
```

How much of the forest does the network cover?
[r.report](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass-stable/manuals/r.report.html) returns
per-class areas, and its JSON output is easy to turn into a table.

```{python}
import pandas as pd

report = json.loads(
    tools.r_report(map="coverage", units=["k", "p"], format="json").stdout
)
rows = []
for cat in report["categories"]:
    if cat["category"] not in (1, 2, 3):   # skip any no-data class
        continue
    area = next(u["value"] for u in cat["units"] if "kilo" in u["unit"])
    pct = next(u["value"] for u in cat["units"] if u["unit"] == "percent")
    rows.append({"seen by (towers)": cat["category"],
                 "area (km²)": round(area, 1), "share of region": f"{pct:.1f}%"})
pd.DataFrame(rows)
```

| seen by (towers) | area (km²) | share of region |
|---|---|---|
| 1 | 416.4 | 26.7% |
| 2 | 214.8 | 13.7% |
| 3 | 61.1 | 3.9% |

> The three towers between them watch about 692 km², or 44% of this 1,560 km² region. Only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The three towers together allow to watch about 692 km², or 44% of this 1,560 km² region. Only
```

4% is covered by all three at once, along the central ridges where their circles
overlap. We map the coverage with one color per level.

```{python}
gs.write_command("r.colors", map="coverage", rules="-",
                 stdin="1 254:224:139\n2 252:141:89\n3 213:62:79")

coverage_map = gj.Map(width=600)
coverage_map.d_rast(map="relief")
coverage_map.d_rast(map="coverage")
coverage_map.d_vect(map="towers", icon="basic/triangle", size=13,
                    fill_color="white", color="black", width=2)
label_towers(coverage_map)
coverage_map.d_legend(raster="coverage", at=(4, 16, 88, 92), flags="b",
                      use=[1, 2, 3], title="towers")
coverage_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(2, 5), bgcolor="white")
coverage_map.show()
```

![Network detection coverage: terrain seen by one tower (yellow), two (orange), or all three (red).](images/coverage.webp)

# Where should a fourth tower go?

The gap map lets us test candidate sites for a fourth tower. A natural candidate is the highest summit that no current tower can see, since high ground has
the best chance of a long view. We isolate the blind area, find its highest cell, and
test a tower there.

```{python}

> # cells no tower currently sees, and their elevation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# cells no tower currently see, and their elevation
```

                 flags="cb", memory=2000)
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="recovered = if(isnull(coverage) && detect_new == 1, 1, null())")
print(f"blind area:        {visible_km2('blind'):.0f} km2")
print(f"recovered by tower: {visible_km2('recovered'):.0f} km2")
```

The best-placed new tower recovers only about 28 km² of the 870 km² blind area, less
than 4% of it. The gap map shows why: what remains unseen is mostly the valley
bottoms between the ridges, and no ridgetop tower can see down into a ravine. Beyond a handful of well-sited towers, adding more brings
sharply diminishing returns. Fire agencies eventually turned to aircraft patrols and,
later, camera and satellite detection for exactly this reason.

```{python}
tools.r_mapcalc(expression="covered_now = if(!isnull(coverage), 1, null())")
gs.write_command("r.colors", map="covered_now", rules="-", stdin="1 150:180:200")
gs.write_command("r.colors", map="recovered", rules="-", stdin="1 215:25:28")
gs.write_command("v.in.ascii", input="-", output="candidate", separator="pipe",
                 columns="x double precision, y double precision", x=1, y=2,

>                  stdin=f"{cx:.0f}|{cy:.0f}")

Reviewer: I think this can also be translated into tools API

site_map = gj.Map(width=600)
site_map.d_rast(map="relief")
site_map.d_rast(map="covered_now")
site_map.d_rast(map="recovered")
site_map.d_vect(map="towers", icon="basic/triangle", size=13,
                fill_color="white", color="black", width=2)
site_map.d_vect(map="candidate", icon="basic/star", size=18,
                fill_color="yellow", color="black", width=2)
site_map.d_barscale(flags="n", at=(2, 5), bgcolor="white")
site_map.show()
```

![Existing coverage (blue), the candidate fourth tower (star), and the small area it recovers (red). Most gaps are valleys no ridgetop tower can see.](images/site_optimization.webp)

# Summary

> You have used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have used
```
